[Music]
it's so wonderful to be back at the
Oxford Union thank you so much for the
invitation thank you for being here well
on the day when your Prime Minister is
struggling to beat her cabinet into
submission and to force them to
acquiesce to what I've termed back in
2016 the most likely outcome of his
brexit process the Hotel California
doctrine where according to the last
verse of the song you're too young to
remember the Eagles own but let me
remind you what the last verse was you
can check out anytime you like but you
can never leave well it may seem
impertinent on a day like this to be
talking about the euro and to be putting
forward the proposition in sharp
contrast to what mr. dubrovsky said in
this chamber a few weeks ago that the
euro has never been more problematic now
I will also try to convince you that the
question of the year is not as separate
from that of brexit as it may seem but
let me begin at the beginning with mr.
de bras gives three main points I don't
know how many of you were here to listen
to him I wasn't I read his remarks the
three points he made was that firstly
Europeans who live in labor under the
euro are better off as a result of the
year the second point he made was that
the euro was actually a very useful and
helpful instrument for Europeans during
the European crisis and thirdly that it
is a success story that it is stronger
than ever
well my first task tonight is to counter
every single one of those myths
I shall argue that the euro was not Oh
has not only not made the Europeans
better off
but it has inflicted a historic defeat
upon European capitalism secondly that
rather than proving helpful in the
crisis that followed 2008 but the euro
has done the euros architectural design
amplified massively that tsunami that
hits the continent of Europe initially
from Wall Street through the City of
London with the financial sector
collapse and consequently led to the
current political disintegration the
disintegration of the political center
whose only true beneficiaries are racist
xenophobic ultra right-wingers that are
coalescing now in a dystopian front
which is a clear and present danger for
civilization in Europe these are strong
claims before supporting them let me
point out a very interesting one might
even call it a delicious paradox one may
say well if you write
Yanis that the euro has never been more
problematic why to the money markets
value the euro so highly compared to the
pound
do you know American dollar and so on
well allow me to point out that there is
no paradox here suppose you are a
Singaporean Chinese American or indeed a
German investor we have money yeah and
for some reason you agree with me that
the fragmentation of the eurozone is at
an advanced stage and the euro has never
been weaker or more problematic should
you sell your euros no let me share a
secret with you as to what you should do
you should shift your euros to a German
bank account why because if the euro
breaks up how will it break up it will
break up because Greece leaves the euro
it won't break up because Italy leaves
the euro the Euro will break up if it
breaks up I'm not wishing
that it does mind you I'm simply
describing the future as I see it the
way it will happen is Germany we live
the euro once the Berlin political class
has had enough of the riffraff you know
us Greeks the Italians the French the
Portuguese and so on
the moment they start sniffing in the
wind the possibility that they may have
to bail out 2.7 trillion years of
Italian debt
believe you me the Buddhist Bank already
has plans in the drawer for printing
Deutsche marks now what will happen then
immediately all German accounts will be
the Donna Rida nominated from euros to
Dutch bank immediately because Germany
has a gigantic current that account
surplus the Deutsche ba is going to go
through the roof so if you happen to
have euros in Deutsche Bank finance Bank
in Frankfurt they will appreciate you
are going to get a magnificent windfall
so can you see how the paradox dissolves
the nearer were getting to any potential
fragmentation of the euro
they higher the value of the German era
of euros in Germany of course what will
happen is euros will be shifted from
Italian bank accounts to German bank
accounts by the way do you know this is
already happening we have about 200
billion in the last 18 months
200 billion that has shifted from
Italian bank accounts to German bank
accounts because of the risk of keeping
your euros in a country that after the
breakout the breakup of the euro zone
will see its currency lit denominated
downwards not upwards so therefore the
fact that the euro is a strong currency
it's a little bit you know back in the
1950s there was a magnificent Jaguars
the cars I mean that way extremely
strong cars extremely strong cars but if
you had an accident in one of them you
ended up dead the car didn't bend much
did not crumble had no crumble zones it
would be intact you'd be dead
that's the euro for you the stronger it
is the weaker the population labor and
living under it the way that it has been
designed now let me say move to the to
to the second issue actually I won't
move to the second issue I'm just going
to table a question and then come back
to it a bit later the second question is
what if I'm right how can it be that
smart bureaucrats people in the European
Commission European Central Bank cannot
see that and only I can see the truth
leave this question in abeyance I'll
come back to it my argument is that they
of course they can see it the smart ones
but you'll see why the design of the
eurozone makes no difference as to
whether they can see it or not now time
some facts for some facts you heard the
story that the euro eliminate the
transaction costs some much much easier
going from one country to the other that
is of course true let me ask you a
question if transaction costs were so
important why is it that there is no
monetary union between Australia and New
Zealand
why did have separate currencies why do
they pay fees for transacting when they
move into Korea from from Sydney to
Christchurch why has there been no
monetary union between no when Sweden
such similar countries their next door
to each other they trade a lot with one
another why don't they create a monetary
union
what does in Canada unite monetarily
with the United States most of Canada
Strait is with the United States there's
I can't tell the difference between
American and Canadian accents I know you
can but these would be the obvious
monetary unions the answer is that
transaction costs are not important what
matters is convergence of economies
investment the way that supply chains
are linked together and let me say that
from that perspective the euro has not
just been a failure it has been
pointless
allow me to compare and contrast two
different countries the Czech Republic
and my country the Czech Republic is in
the EU but not in the eurozone Greece is
in both in 1995 the Czech Republic's per
capita Li per capita income was 18% of
that of Germany 1995 in Greece it was 48
percent Greek per capita income in 1995
was 48 percent of German per capita what
is it today the Czech Republic's per
capita income is 48 percent of German
per capita it can and the Greek one has
gone down to 41 percent so it really
didn't matter that the Czech Republic
did not have the Europe and Greece did
indeed if you look at the converges real
economic convergence and convergence in
prosperity within the eurozone we had
divergence the opposite of convergence
whereas between countries like Hungary
Poland and the Czech Republic that did
not have the euro and the rest of rich
eurozone of the rich part of the euro
zone like the Netherlands Austria and
Germany you have converges so the euro
was pointless from the perspective of
economic integration bringing peoples
together in terms of production in terms
of consumption and in terms of
prosperity but it was worse than
pointless
it was truly destructive I'm not saying
this as the former finance minister of a
bankrupt country I'm only saying this as
a European consider this anyone who
borrowed in 2008 anyone who borrowed in
dollars to invest in Wall Street made by
today from 2008 you today about 51% so
for if you borrowed $100 and you
invested it on average in Wall Street
you end up today with 151 if you did
this the same thing in South Korea you
would break even if you invested $100 in
Frankfurt or Paris European equities you
would have lost 1/3 so there was a lot
of wealth destruction it is not just a
question of inequity within the eurozone
it is also that the euro has created
circumstances that destroyed a lot of
wealth of a lot of rich people as well
so it was both iniquitous
and inefficient let me give you another
example take Germany Germany is the
greatest beneficiary of the euro zone
between 2000 when the Europe began and
now because effectively the euro is
another form of the deutsche mark let's
not fool ourselves the fact that the
riffraff of Europe was part of the euro
of the deutsche mark but it was our
currency the kinds of Italians
you know the Mediterraneans the
grasshoppers of Europe it kept the value
of the currency low and that was a great
boon to German exporters so I just read
the back of the envelope calculation
calculation on the train here the total
net export surplus of German industry
between 2000 and 2018 was 2.2 trillion
2.23 2.2 trillion euros not bad
now what do you do if you are constantly
in surplus with somebody else if I'm
constantly in service with you it means
I keep selling more stuff to you but if
I keep selling more stuff to you then I
end up with your money and I don't have
any thing to do with that money so the
result was that there was a lake of
euros accumulating in the banks of
Frankfurt and you know the worst
nightmare of a banker instead of money
that they are not lending they don't
sleep at night if they have money and
they are sitting on it and there is not
enough demand full of mine so what do
they end up doing
lending it to the Greeks lending into
the Irish because why think about it
Greece what did Greece and Ireland and
Portugal bring into the eurozone they
did not bring the fantastic cars we
don't produce cars okay what what were
pretty producing some oranges apples
some olive oil but we brought one
amazing asset into the eurozone 92% of
houses were owned by the residents we
didn't have mortgages we didn't have
credit cards we're two really low levels
of debt I know it sounds strange but the
greatest asset that Greece brought into
the eurozone was low levels of debt and
collateral you know we had low incomes
we were unproductive was like corrupt we
were all those things but we owned the
homes and we did not oh my you know what
we were we were the Apple in the eye of
German bankers a banker looks at you you
do not owe money to anyone you own your
own home and you're thirsty for washing
machines German cars imports you are a
wet dream for the German
so what do they do they lend you and
suddenly everything's fantastic from
2000 to 2008 the eurozone resembled a
majestic riverboat that was launched on
to a calm steel ocean it looked splendid
because it was a riverboat was not an
ocean faring vessel the moment we had
the first crisis the first storm
he started sinking why because the money
that was lent by the German and the
French banks but mainly the German banks
to the periphery take Ireland for
instance remember the huge bubbles which
are now repeating themselves by the way
that's another story
they created a fantasy the delusion of
prosperity people were getting credit
cards I'm gonna I was receiving in
Greece credit cards that had not applied
for now seriously no I'm not I'm not
joking
there was a deluge of credit cards that
people were receiving the mail all you
had to do was to sign it and start
spending and we had to tell you them up
and burn them but some people use them
so that created demand for imports
everybody was happy
it was vendor finance it's like me going
into a car dealer a Ferrari car dealer
saying I were the car and I want the
money to bite and they were giving you
so suddenly you know lots of sales so
Ferrari cars I mean is worse than
Ferrari cars was Porsches you know
Greece had the highest percentage of
poor SEC four-wheel drives in Europe it
was not the oranges
but purchase it was loans from German
banks and nobody forced him to give it
to us now I'm not blaming them
I mean I'm blaming the Greeks for every
irresponsible borrower
ladies and gentlemen there is an
irresponsible lender but this is a
structure of a mana monetary union when
that lacks the federal treasury what
happens is there is a period of
exuberant growth both in the surplus in
the deficit countries during that period
gigantic bubbles are being built in the
economies of the deficit countries and
in the banking sectors of the surface
countries and then something happens
usually in Wall Street 1929 2008 the
bubbles burst and then it's catastrophe
we had that in Europe and Britain was
part of that it was called the gold
standard fixed exchange rates a currency
union during the mid war period and John
Maynard Keynes wrote a fantastic piece
the economic consequences of mr.
Churchill who was then the Chancellor of
the Exchequer that brought Britain back
into the Euro of the time the gold
standard there is out being that Britain
suffered massive recession as a result
of that and then after 1929 thankfully
you got out of it in 1931 by cutting the
peg now the problem however is there is
no peg to cut in the eurozone because we
didn't keep our currencies we didn't
just have fixed exchange rates in the
mid war period you had a pound the
French to the franc the Americans had
the dollar and you just had fixed
exchange rates and that was just a
matter of an overnight decision by
government to sever but we have the year
everywhere and we have this remarkable
situation where in our infinite wisdom
this is an ironic phrase just in case we
didn't get it we created think about you
only have to state it to realize how
observe the situation with the eurozone
we created a central bank the largest
central bank in the world in terms of
the size of the economy that it handles
the European economies the largest calm
the world
bigger than America bigger the China so
we have a megalith of a central bank
without a Treasury to have its back and
we have 19 Treasuries that have to bail
out national banking systems without the
help of a trade a central bank why
because the central bank of Europe was
designed never to bail out the riff
Raff's banks and States the italian ones
the Greek ones own so the rule was the
central bank does not print money even
during moments of emergency in order to
sustain the monetary union that we've
created so think about it in 2008 when
the bottom fell out of the eurozone the
Fed the central bank of the United
States of America started printing money
as if there's no tomorrow to refloat the
banking system the Bank of England was
doing the same the Bank of Japan was
doing the same the Bank of China the
Chinese government did the most
magnificent operation in salvaging
global capitalism by boosting the rate
of investment from 33% to 51 percent of
GDP and this is what together with the
Fed and the Bank of England kept
capitalism alive let's be clear on this
and what did Europe do they shifted the
gigantic losses of the idiotic banks
onto the shoulders of the taxpayers
it's called austerity George Osborne and
I had disagreements
he believed in expansionary contraction
that is expansionary monetary policy
printing money to help the financial
sector recover while at the same time
doing some austerity which was a major
error on behalf of Osborne but
nevertheless that's another issue today
we can have another debate on but at
least it was the expansion apart and it
contraction apart George thought this
was a good mix wasn't what he thought
was a good mix we can disagree about
this
but what we cannot disagree is that what
the European Central Bank was doing was
a crime against logic they were doing
contractionary contraction in the middle
of the worst crisis of capitalism they
were shrinking the money supply and
doing austerity shifting all the pain
that the banks had created through their
idiotic bets especially bets that they
were taking out in the United States
with dollars they were borrowing from
Wall Street and they shifted all this
pain onto the Greek taxpayers the
Latvian taxpayers the german taxpayers
now this is what you do if you want to
poison the politics and the democracy of
Europe and this is exactly what it's
done now what has changed since then
Europe continental Europe the euro zone
has affected a number of changes each
and every one of them is the minimum
that was necessary in order to keep the
Euro alive while at the same time
maximizing that this content on the
ground and the discontent not just Adam
Greek the Greeks and the Portuguese and
the Irish but of the Germans do you know
that as we speak today 40 year olds in
Germany are experiencing the worst level
of inequality in the last 25 years do
you know that half of the population of
Germany today is worse off than they
were 15 years ago and that is something
that we really must note because Germany
is swimming in money it's not grace okay
we are goners but Germany has what you
had two point two trillion surplus
Canada can service it has copper
corporations that are saving huge
quantities of money they are in surplus
families that are saving and the federal
government that is in surplus they are
in suppose so everybody's in surplus and
yet 50 percent of the population are
worse off today than they were 15 years
ago why well it's really very simple
ladies and gentlemen
to be an economist to understand that if
everybody's in surplus who isn't deficit
because my service is delivered I cannot
have a surplus without somebody owning a
deficit the answer is of course they are
exporting the capital to foreigners they
are entrusting the savings of the German
people and German industry huh to
foreigners while within Germany because
they're doing this there is the lowest
level of investment since 1946 as
compared in proportion of the savings
and the liquidity available so the point
I'm making again I made it before I will
repeat it once again is that the euro
has been a devilish design a design that
was it was a little bit ok let's not be
too scientific it's too late in the day
it's my third speech today so it's a bit
like removing the shock absorbers from
your car and driving it into a pothole
what do you expect will happen now and
this is the time to return to the
question that are left in abeyance
before remember the question how can
smart people not know that they do know
it ladies and gentlemen this is my list
by design this is designer idiocy why am
I saying that well Francois Mitterrand
very smart man understood very well that
the monetary union that we now have in
Europe is not sustainable he understood
it the question is why did he do it
the answer he gave in a private
conversation with a very close friend of
mine who used to be a member of
parliament here in Britain was this I do
not have speaking imperially you know
like French presidents do I do not have
the power the authority to bring about a
federation but I can bring about with
Helmut I would call the Chancellor of
Germany at the time I can bring about a
monetary union that is going to create a
massive strike
crisis and then the people who that will
succeed us will have no alternative but
to create the Federation but he was
precisely wrong where he was wrong was
that yes the currency union would create
a gigantic crisis dissolving this
monetary union would be extremely
painful for everyone
independent of whether you agree with
the Euro or not and I make no bones
about it
it would be catastrophic for all of us
even for people of Britain because you
are too close to the the continent of
Europe whether you are in via or not but
the crisis that the monetary union is
capable of producing poisons democracy
if you go now to Germany if you go to
Italy if you go to France even to Greece
and you say to people of which I say
because I believe in it
what we need is a federal solution we
need more of the same way more younger
more merkel go away and they jump on the
bandwagon of the disintegration list and
in particular the disintegration is that
offer them the simple answers that
always flourish during periods of
deflation it is the Jews fault
the Syrians fault the Greeks fault the
germans fault everybody agrees it's the
French who are to blame
okay these lazy answers always flourish
during periods of defect deflation
ladies and gentlemen was always going to
be the result of this particular design
of the euro and deflation baguettes
monsters
it was boo Cellini it was Hitler now it
is salvini quartz zir Hoffer lepen all
those people that Steve Bannon is
organizing and putting together in a
fascist International and this is
something you should have in mind here
when you welcome him to this chamber and
I hope that you challenge him on this
before we move to questions let me say
that the URIs design is one thing but
the politics should be another we are
not playthings of historical forces
beyond our control we have the power
unlike molecules and unlike DNA through
the power of reason and through dialogue
in fora like this one to change the
world we live in to change the
institutions but for this we need
democracy
for this we need dialogue unfortunately
the URIs design has created a vicious
cycle between failed institutions that
create failed policies that lead to this
content and then the only way the
powers-that-be
in Brussels can clamp down and continue
to impose their authority is through
increasing degrees of authoritarianism
so failed policies breed
authoritarianism authoritarianism
maintains faith policies those failed
policies lead to even more
authoritarianism which can either take
the form of the Sylvanus the strongmen
there are bands that want to effectively
take us back to the 1930s all it takes
the form of mr. doe broths gives because
let me tell you I am here today I was
invited by the good people of the Oxford
Union during the summer it was maybe
early summer to be here a few weeks ago
to argue against mr. Dombrowski's
but when mr. Dobrev skis office found
out that I am going to be the one that
opposes him he demanded of the cool
people of the Oxford Union that I should
be and I was disinvited it was not one
of the union's finest hours that they
disinvited me even though I appreciate
the offer for me to come a few weeks
later but it is a disservice to you that
you didn't have with the Dabrowski's and
me fighting this good strong
in front of you so that he would have
the right to reply to what I'm saying
the quality of our democracy is of the
utmost importance we must maintain
dialogue I am NOT one of those who
believe in not giving a platform to
opponents however vile they might be but
I am NOT going to accept what I am
ladies and gentlemen I believe that the
rift between levers and remainders in
this country is the result of the
ill-fated design of the euro if the euro
had not been designed the way it was
there would be no brexit now but it was
designed that way and brexit triumphed
in June of 2016 I fought against brick
sir nobody can accuse me of being a
lackey of Brussels but I hope it's a
mistake at the same time I think that
the idea that there is something called
the people's vote is offensive to those
who were voted for leave in the first
referendum as if they were not people I
believe that this rift has to be healed
in this country I don't believe that
mrs. Mae is capable of doing it but I
think that the next generation and that
is you have a golden opportunity and a
moral duty to go ahead with this healing
it is essential that we on the continent
in you in prison independently of what
happens with brexit maintain a
commitment to uniting together as
Democrats to deal with the four crises
that are tearing our societies apart the
private debt of too low investment in
green technologies that will be the
technologies that save our jobs in the
future and the planet anti-poverty Drive
and public debt these are like climate
change you cannot solve these problems
in Britain alone we cannot do it in
Europe in Greece in France we need to do
it together it doesn't matter whether we
maintain this EU will change the you
what kind of breaks it we need to
coordinate along those lines and we must
unite to fight the rising nationalist
international that mr. Bannon utilizing
the divisions in Europe caused by the
European Union's terrible design is
coming here because mr. Trump and mr.
bannon care about one thing they want a
divided reactionary Europe as being
instrumental to their plans for the
United States visa via the rest of the
world and let me finish with an aside
which is
I think pertinent to the point I was
making about the authoritarianism of the
European Union and they are trying to
escape
giant dialog some time ago I was invited
to another debate with a certain mr.
Steve Bannon in Ireland he agree
he agreed I agreed and then he pulled
out so the honest isn't on you to
challenge him whenever it is that he's
coming to this fine chamber thank you
very much
thank you very much and I think that
aside at the end is good advice myself
and everyone else in this room as we
considered events on Friday I want to
begin by asking about the political
impetus you mentioned crisis ranging
from personal to national debt or
climate change at a time in which seems
that the left and a particular
population is reasserting national
identity how are you optimistic that
your movement can bring about a European
identity that encourages European
solutions these problems my only source
of optimism is when I talk to people
it's not the media it's not opinion
polls
it's dialogue with people on the street
in chambers like this across Europe so
our democracy in Europe movement the m25
is mobilizing everywhere wherever we go
we find the contradictions of today's
world we have the best and the worst
we have people even the worst are okay
most people who support for cystic
parties they're not fascists they are
just angry they feel disenfranchised
they feel like cattle whose market value
has tanked and who are being treated as
such by the establishment I think that
it the the progressives the so-called
you know Liberal Democratic
establishment its so-called they are
neither liberal nor democratic they are
making a crucial error in demonizing
those people so look at you know the
hardcore remainders the way they
demonize BRICS it is the column racist
the column lists that Ania in the United
States you have the ridiculous situation
where the Democratic Party is going to
the people who voted for Trump and
saying you were duped by Putin Putin
stole the election through Facebook my
goodness I mean what an insult to people
who by the way most of those people who
vote for Trump had vote for Obama in
2008 how can you say to them there that
they are racist and that they were duped
by Putin I mean the
put in try to influence the election the
United States I'm sure you did but I did
too I did I really did I did my best to
influence the election and failed
spectacularly and put in head I'm sure
about the same impact that I had okay so
this is the I think this is really very
important we do not sacrifice good
people to the ultra-right by treating
them like morons and by demonizing them
this is crucial
we have to win the battle of ideas by
treating people with respect
independently of whether they agree or
even like us or not
given that the whole structure of the
European Union reinforces national
divisions and politics particularly in
the parliamentary elections how
difficult is it to build a political
movement that has genuine impacted all
of those countries when you have such
clear divisions and toys of domestic
political parties to the representation
in Europe it's really very hard but all
good things in life are very hard to
achieve otherwise it wouldn't feel good
look I have no idea what they will
succeed or not I think what your
president is referring to is the fact
that diem25
is the first attempt to have a
pan-european unitary movement so we
don't have you know a branch in France
and a branch in Germany and the Germans
decide amongst themselves what they want
for Germany are the French what they
want to France let me give you a very
simple example we set up a new political
party in March we call it Mara Mara 25
Mara mean means day or deem in Latin so
our electoral program what we are
proposing regarding fiscal policy social
policy climate change banking everything
was debated by all our members including
Germans Portuguese British members we
don't give a damn whether you are in the
you or not Europe is one thing
independent and we do not conflate
Europe with the European Union and then
we all voted for the final version of
the Greek political party we're doing
this the same thing on the 24th and 25th
of November for our German party
democracy or OPA
so we are trying a different kind of
transnational progressive politics that
is a new model is it going to succeed
probably not but so what as I keep
telling my friends I know that I'm going
to die and I'm sure you will also die I
hope not for a very long time but this
is not a reason not to wake up in the
morning optimistic so we shouldn't
really care so much about the outcome of
what we do we should care about what we
do I want to ask that about your your
time as finance minister and it was
widely reported that you considered
readapting the drachma and I was
wondering how true that was her genuine
of upon securement that was I'm guilty
and what
led you to look for a3 relaxation I'm
guilty I'm guilty absolutely guilty but
you know so is dr. trebla the finance
minister of Germany and every other
finance minister worth their salt the
euro is a fragile construct every bank
in the world not just in Europe has a
plan for grexit a plan for it'll exit
yeah I you know I plan for Germany it's
what I was saying before reassuring the
Dutchman everybody if they don't they
are amiss they they have not fulfilled
their duties to their shareholders as
bankers so every bank has a plan for
exit the European Central Bank I know he
had a plan I read it it's called plan Z
so I called mine plan net clinics I had
run out of London letters yeah and it's
important doesn't mean that you want to
activate it but the moment I became
Finance Minister I was immediately first
day I was Finance Minister I was told in
no uncertain terms if you don't sign on
the dotted line of cutting pensions
forever of selling your railways for
pittance to bankrupt company you know
I'm just amazing requirements that
dissolve any sense of national
sovereignty or common sense unless you
do all that we will close down your
banks what yeah that's a coup d'etat
this is what you know even the CIA was
not doing that to banana republics in
the 1950s and it was happening in Europe
in 2015 so the only way of saying to
them listen I have a I have an outside
option if you push me too much I will
yeah we'll go to the drachma
I had steps planned before going to the
drachma because I didn't want to go to
the drachma
so I my plan was for a parallel payment
system that was euro denominated that
would act as a buffer and as it would
bias time so that the powers that be in
Europe would get their senses back and
be able to pull back from the brink if
necessary but that parallel payment
system could at the touch of a button
become the foundation of a new currency
I
I should be just sized if I didn't have
that plan but like you know your mo D
they have I'm sure in the drawers plans
for responding to a French army invasion
in Kent right I mean that's what armies
do doesn't mean they want it does not
mean that they are war mongers who want
war against France it means that you
should have a back-up plan so the being
confronted with these sort of horrible
bargains upon your entrance to the
government to that change of views of
the European Union or they just confirm
your worst nightmares were you'd really
shocked by the way it was government now
it it currently simply confirmed that
which I already knew I had no illusions
I knew that I would be facing a wall of
you know what I refer to my in my that's
in their own book the Swedish national
anthem routine that tourism a knows very
well you walk in there you are very well
prepared you put forward your case and
you expect people to shoot it down to
tell you what why your proposals are
wrong and they don't and they say things
about completely independent of what
you've said it is as if you just sung
the Swedish national anthem and I'm sure
Terry's ma has experienced that I knew
it was going to happen but I had a major
weapon people say oh you walked in there
with a I had a weapon I you know I owed
320 billion and I was not going to take
another loan to pretend that I'm
repaying it until and unless we had a
sensible conversation and I didn't mind
because you see if you owe a thousand
quid to your bank Barclays then you're
in trouble but if you owe three hundred
and twenty billion they are in trouble
I think with that we'll move to some
questions from the audience I think you
put your hand up and wait for a
microphone to come to you we can never
recognize you
let's go first to the gentleman on the
front row right here thank you can I
stop saying thank you for such a
wonderful talk and I thoroughly enjoyed
it and from a personal perspective can I
say you're one of the few people who
manages to unite both my Thatcherite
father and socialist uncle and their
enjoyments of your appearances and but I
just wondered since you've now launched
this pan-european movement and at least
in all of our lifetimes will a united
Europe always remain a romantic ideal or
can it ever be a reality look the answer
is I have no idea really anybody wants
is these questions is either lying to
himself or to everybody else or the both
yeah I have no idea what will happen
what I know is that the alternative to a
united Europe is a dystopia let's say
for a moment just for a moment okay
suppose we are all now brick cities
yeah not just bricks it ears exit ears
everybody should exit right what would
happen what's going to happen in Europe
now if the Euro however terrible it may
be dissolves well I'll tell you what's
gonna happen there's going to be a
tectonic shift that divides Europe down
the River Rhine and across the Alps what
will happen is Germany will recreate the
deutsche mark and Austria Holland Poland
Hungary Czech Republic Slovakia and the
Baltics will join that the deutsche mark
zone they're not going to create their
own currencies they are too integrated
with German heavy industry folks were
again I gave group and although that
chunk of Europe North East Europe
Calvinist Europe call it what everyone
it's going to have a gigantic current
current account surplus really in
relation to the rest of the world so the
deutsche mark is going to go through the
roof as I was saying before that will
mean experts will fall and there will be
a substantial increase in unemployment
in Germany Poland in those countries so
you're going to have falling prices
because the price of the currents goes
up
deflation with unemployment in Germany
not good the only people who will
benefit from that is the alternative
Rhode Island and the various folks who
are thinking of the 1930s with glee if
you know what I mean the rest of Europe
what's going to happen the currencies
the rest of Europe will depreciate that
will create inflationary pressures and
you can have a combination of inflation
and unemployment in France Italy Spain
and so on is this a Europe we want to
live in you think that too through
brexit you are insulating yourself from
that catastrophe now you are not going
to be able to set sail for you know the
Indian Ocean it's a beautiful island but
it's a moveable you're going to remain
very close to this kind of Europe so a
united Europe is something we must fight
for it doesn't matter exactly how it
happens but at least there has to be
very very close coordination of economic
policy of monetary policy of investment
policy and we need free movement the
idea that you are going to elect big
borders around Britain and you're going
to have barbed wire fences and you will
Electrify them and you will be safe this
is absurd you're going to simply become
very sad and very miserable if you do
that okay and and the quality of the
food is going to deteriorate as well so
oh by the way you mentioned that yeah
one of the great joys and concerns I
have in this country is that I'm very
good friends with Tory cabinet ministers
and members of the House of Lords of the
Conservative Party and Jeremy Corbyn and
John MacDonald and I get on with them
and I say the same thing to all of them
and we all agree there must be something
wrong in this world this is an
indication you know the fact that both
your socialist uncle and
your torie father like me is a sure sign
I enjoyed it but it's a sure sign that
we live in a completely topsy-turvy
world fantastic let's move to the next
question and let's go to the women in
the green jumper on the end of the right
here hi thank you um I study populism
and anti-democratic attitudes and you
talked about how democracy was so
important moving forward but Europe and
the rest of the world are going through
a crisis of political trust and when
there's low political trust democracy
and democratic institutions fail so what
do you propose to rebuild that trust
following failed programs and failed
institutions thank you well the populism
is a symptom the fragmentation the
political center has not held in Europe
but how could it hold when you're
telling teenagers in the majority of
countries in Europe that there will be
no life prospects in their lifetime
would you expect them to do do you
expect them to take it what do you
expect them to be vulnerable to the
sirens of xenophobia who say to them
it's a bloody Germans or the Jews or the
Greeks or the Brits or the French or
this it would those narratives of
populist xenophobia always rise up to
the surface when there is a massive
crisis of capitalism and in particular
when the crisis is deflationary not
inflationary inflation is not a good
thing it eats into people's incomes
savings and so on
but it is deflation as I was saying
during my talk that baguettes political
monsters people make a mistake even some
historians in thinking that out of
Hitler was the child of the
hyperinflation not true if you look at
the rate of inflation in mid-war Germany
and you plot it against the electoral
success the votes
of the Nazi of the National Socialist
Party you'll see that while inflation
was positive in River even high the
nationalist Socialist Party was getting
minuscule proportions
it was after 1930 when herb ruining the
treasurer of Germany then introduced
austerity after 1929 and inflation
turned into falling prices that the
Nazis skyrocket it is not an accident
that we are having exactly the same
thing now with deflationary forces that
are a result of the imbalance between
savings and investment I speak like an
economist now for a minute we have a
very major imbalance between savings and
investment and if you think about it you
don't need to be an economist think of
savings as the supply of money to be
invested to be borrowed and investment
the demand for investment funding when
supply exceeds demand whether it's
apples or money the price Falls
what is the price of money it's the
interest rate the problem with the
interest rates that once it falls below
zero the pension funds of the German
hives wife the pension fund starts
shrinking and then she stops supporting
Angela Merkel and she turns to populism
to the eye of death this is what has
happened so what how do we deal with it
we're not going to deal with it simply
by good you know with nice rhetoric we
need to change the circumstances of
people's lives so we need investments we
need to push investment up because
investment is what we need to create the
good quality jobs that will create the
incomes that will stop deflation the
markets won't do it on their own the
markets have stuck in those who all the
money are too scared to invest it
because they fear in a never-ending
cycle of reinforcement of belief that
others are not going to invest their
investment is not going to be profitable
they don't invest the result is demand
is low sales are low they say I you see
we were right not invest so it's
self-perpetuating
the only way to do it is by for instance
having a large scale investment program
like the New Deal that FDR Franklin
Roosevelt had in 1933 at the European
level you can have invest
banks collaborating Britain should have
an investment bank it doesn't you should
create one we have the European
Investment Bank we have the KfW in
Germany they should issue bonds there
our central bank should buy those bonds
the money should go into a green
transition green energy green transport
fund to create the jobs that will return
optimism and that on its own will see
populism away we are time for one final
question
so let's go to the hand at the back I
can only see a red sort of jumper
sticking up but that's it yes yeah you
there yeah yep thank you very much for
your talk it was very interesting
especially coming from Germany I agree
so you said with reason that given the
political state and fragmentation
federalism and joined economic and
fiscal policies is not the way forward
in sustaining the Euro but yet on the
other hand you said that stopping the
Europe exiting and then creating this
northeast and southwest split is also
not the way to go so do you have any
proposal of how to do it better
oh please do not get me wrong I'm a
federalist I want to see a federation at
Democratic Federation what I'm saying as
a realist at the same time is that this
crisis has poisoned our politics look at
your country you had a federal election
what a year and a half ago and it Europe
owes don't even never really discussed
in your own country your country depends
on Europe and Europe depends on your
country and it was not really a serious
issue even mr. Schultz running as the
head of the Opposition as per day
rejected everything that McLean had said
as necessary and minimum prerequisites
for saving the euro zone Merkel did what
Merkel does which is you know being
mercurial and simply winning one
election after the other without ever
having a vision about anything
even though she's a very she's a fine
woman as a personal level and I'm I
thoroughly approved the two-week
epiphany she had to let the Syrians in
but then she reversed policy on this
event but anyway so the point I'm making
is that the politics is not allowing us
before we stabilize the political
economy of Germany before we give the
half of the 50% of the Germans who are
feeling worse off today than they were
before the hearts fear reforms unless we
give them a sense that Europe is good
for them and that the solutions come
from Europe not the problems come from
Europe then the German public is not
going to be interested in the federal
moves which are necessary so we need two
phases the first phase is something like
the investment program that I was
advocating which does not need any
federal moves we have the institutions
we have the European Investment Bank we
have the European Centre Bank but we can
use them in a way that have never been
used before to stabilize Europe to
create hope again amongst the people of
Germany the people of Greece to see
Europe as a realm of shared prosperity
not a realm of individualized problems
and then we can have a discussion about
the kind of democratic constitution that
we must write together the Germans and
the Greeks one of the greatest tragedies
of the euro crisis is that it was
portrayed as a clash between Germany and
Greece between the Netherlands in Italy
between north and south
this is analytically false and
politically toxic in my view what
happened was that the Grasshoppers of
the of the north the bankers like
Deutsche Bank and the grasshoppers of
the south the Greek oligarchy the
Italian ology bind it together before
the crisis to create a gigantic bubble
the bubble burst then they shifted all
the pain to the German hard-working
people to the Greek hard-working people
and portrayed it as a north-south divide
in a north-south clash we need to
overcome this great well thank you very
much that question that concludes our
event today so thank you very much for
joining us
you